if you sit for 10 hours a day compared
to 9 hours a day it's about a 10%
increased risk of dementia if you sit
for 12 hours a day it's about a 60%
increased risk of dementia 60% yes so
it's a problem that we have to deal with
David reand professor of human
evolutionary biology exercise physiology
and Neuroscience at the University of
Southern California we are dealing with
brain health problems that are only
going to increase as our population ages
and healthy aging is linked to three
behaviors diet physical activity and
social connections for example people
who have stronger social connections
tend to have better brain outcomes than
people who don't does excessive alcohol
use to shrink the brain yes over one
drink per day is associated with
negative Health outcomes sleep is the
other one that's a big factor in
cognitive decline right it is less sleep
and lots of sleep are both associated
with higher risk is there a optimal
amount of exercise physical activity
guidelines are 150 minutes per week but
only 25 % of adults in the US meet those
guidelines with older adults doing 2 to
four minutes per day two to four but
there are these small activities that
provide big benefits that generate new
neurons and those neurons get integrated
into key parts of the brain number one
is remote work is dangerous it's natural
for the human body I'm concerned about
physical health what's the Practical
advice to people that work at home that
is realistic for us if you combine with
it will literally change your life
I think this is fascinating I looked at
the back end of our YouTube channel and
it says that since this channel started
69.9% of you that watch it frequently
haven't yet hit the Subscribe button so
I have a favor to ask you if you've ever
watched this Channel and enjoyed the
content if you're enjoying this episode
right now please could I ask a small
favor please hit the Subscribe button
helps this channel more than I can
explain and I promise if you do that to
return the favor we will make the show
better and better and better and better
and better that's the promise I'm
willing to make you if you hit the
Subscribe button do we have a
[Music]
deal David if you had to summarize the
essence of what your work shines Al
light on and what it intends to help us
understand as human beings how would you
summarize that what my work has been
focused on is uh understanding how and
why physical activity especially and
lifestyle behaviors in general can
impact health and most specifically
impact the health of our brains um and I
think that you know we are dealing with
um brain health problems that are only
going to increase as our population ages
uh so we have uh we have six million
people in the US today that are
diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease or
other related dementias that's projected
to grow to around 13 million people over
the next 25 years or so um it's we're
projected to have 150 million people
diagnosed with dementia worldwide over
the next 30 years or so um so it's a
problem that we have to deal with and I
my work has been focused on ways that we
can prevent these diseases that are
associated with aging why does the brain
matter and I say this in part because I
think for most of my life I just assumed
you know I understand muscles I can go
to the gym and work on my muscles but
the brain I just thought is this like
piece of tofu in between my skull that I
have very little control over yeah I
mean I think that is that was the
prevailing view for a long time that you
know we grow our brains uh as children
and during adolescence and by the time
you're in your 20s your brain has done
all the growing it's going to do and now
it's just this Progressive shrinking
over the rest of your life and you know
over the last few decades we've realized
that's not true actually that you can uh
generate new neurons especially in uh
key areas of the brain like the
hippocampus that's associated with
memory and that that growth of new
neurons may be the key to preventing or
staving off these neurodegenerative
diseases that have this big impact on
the Aging brain um and so you know if we
can find ways to do that and and what I
study is uh kind of doing that through
physical activity and exercise um then
we might be able to prevent some of the
cognitive decline people experience with
age
maybe even saave off or prevent the
development of Alzheimer's disease or
other dementias what evidence have
scientists got that we can actually grow
our brain well that's a great question
the evidence in humans is uh a little
trickier so I can talk more about the
evidence from animal models because with
animal models you can actually look
inside the brain and see what's
happening after say an exercise
intervention so there have now been many
many studies especially in mice and rats
where um researchers have shown that if
you give them access to running wheels
or if you have them run on a treadmill
that you actually generate new neurons
and those neurons survive and get
integrated into key parts of the brain
and we focus a lot on the hippocampus um
because it's so important to memory um
which is a which is a major aspect of
being human is being able to remember
things and uh researchers have shown
very clearly that exercise and physical
activity in these rodent models leads to
the birth and survival of new
neurons what is a neuron what's a neuron
is the main brain cell um so a neuron is
sort of the main cell in your brain
that's responsible for um communication
and transmission of information across
brain regions and where you said this
hippocampus thing which is where I know
you referenced that it's a sort of
Center Point for memory yeah where is
that located in the head so the
hippocampus is sort is in the temporal
deep in the temporal lobe of the brain
it looks like a seahorse if you know if
it's kind of this curved um curved
object in the brain that plays a big
role in different aspects of memory so
it plays a big role especially in
working memory which is um keeping
things in your memory over the short
term that you may need to recall quickly
um and it also plays a big role in the
formation of memories of events um that
happen in your life and also in spatial
navigation which is a an important part
of moving around in the world so it's a
really key part of the brain and it's
also one of the parts of the brain that
is most effective by neurod degenerate
diseases like Alzheimer's disease so it
is a part of the brain that deteriorates
in these diseases leading to memory
deficits that have a big effect on your
daily life is that the only part of the
brain that we're able to sort of
regenerate or is it can the rest of you
know I'm thinking about these rats and
these mice if we put them under a brain
scan would we see the the mass of the
brain
increasing question and is it just that
little seahorse hippocampus part or is
it the whole brain growing so in in
rodent models where uh where researchers
have done sort of this detailed work the
hippocampus is where uh mainly where new
neurons have been found associated with
exercise in human studies brain effects
have been more widespread so you do see
volumetric changes in the hippocampus
but you also see volumetric changes or
Pres obervation of brain volume in uh
frontal loes which are associated with
executive cognitive function so things
like planning and decision making um
where do we need to begin to understand
this relationship that humans have
between exercise and their brains
there's got to be a point in history
where exercise
became I guess Pro survival in a way
where it became sort of imperative for
us as a human species to do in order to
preserve and extend our cognitive
capacity I guess yeah I mean all animals
generally have to move to survive right
they have to move to find food in some
way but at some point during human
history um our our pattern of movement
shifted pretty dramatically and we think
that was around 2 million years ago and
at that point we shifted from a more
aplike lifestyle to uh hunting and
Gathering lifestyle where our our travel
distances increased drastically so we
were moving over you know 20 kilometers
sometimes per day um sometimes longer um
and our intensity of movement probably
shifted a bit to higher intensities and
so the need to uh be physically active
changed and if we think about the way
that our physiology evolved our
physiology evolved in this context of
large levels of physical activity on a
consistent basis and so I like to think
of that as sort of the normal
um condition for humans and anything
else so as we kind of progress into
modern times and and many people have
dropped their activity that's actually
uh the condition that is quite different
from the way that our physiology
functions best and and from the way that
our physiology evolved does this mean
that if I don't do physical activity my
brain will shrink that's a good question
I mean on a on a broad Public Health
scale uh yes you know levels of physical
activity or inactivity is associated
with poor brain health smaller volumes
of key brain structures so smaller
hippoc cample volumes for example and
worse cognition overall and greater risk
of dementia and Alzheimer's disease on a
personal level it's hard to say
specifically right because there's so
many factors that go into your risk of
um of dealing with these conditions but
I can say that the best way for any
individual to reduce their risk of
cognitive decline is to be physically
active what exactly is going on in my
brain then when I'm physically active
that's causing my brain to be protected
insulated from things like Alzheimer's
and Dementia and in some areas of the
brain to actually grow what is what is
actually happening inside a lot a lot of
fun things um so I mean one of the
things that happens when we exercise is
we increase blood flow to the brain and
that helps bring nutrients and and keep
our neurons functioning properly but
another thing that happens is that your
muscles actually generate proteins
called myokines and those travel to the
brain and they uh interact with neurons
in ways that upregulate neurotropins so
there's this great neurotropin called
brain derived neurotropic factor bdnf
and bdnf acts kind of like a fertilizer
for brain cells or for new neurons so
bdnf when it's upregulated with exercise
um helps both the birth of new neurons
and it helps them to survive and
integrate into the processes that
they're that they're meant to work for
this suit probably a stupid question but
I'm just wondering why the brain just
doesn't do that anyway I know it
wouldn't it be nice wouldn't it be nice
if I didn't have to exercise for the
brain to restore itself in such a way to
expand it it would be nice in some ways
but that's just that's not really the
way that our physiology works right so
you know as I was kind as I was saying
if you think of the sort of natural
condition of humans as being Physically
Active because that's what we had to to
find food and survive then our
physiology is adapted to that condition
and over the course of two million years
we never had to adapt to low levels of
physical activity because it just wasn't
a part of being human and so it's only
been in the last you know few hundred
years that we've seen this rapid decline
in activity and that's just not enough
time to see that sort of adaptation
occur what happened a couple hundred
years ago that caused this decline in
physical activity was there like a
certain invention or something was there
a change in cultural understanding I
mean I think think start with the
Industrial Revolution okay as we as we
mechanize and we find ways to um to
reduce um our the the need to uh be
physically active to gain access to food
to survive um and then as as we move on
you know in the last 50 60 70 years we
start to see a a lot more office jobs
right we start to see changes in our
work life that reduce activity patterns
throughout the day cars I guess cars so
in terms of commuting Leisure Time what
do we what do most people do during
their Leisure Time the couch is really
comfortable our screens are really
enticing TV screens but now phone and
computer and all these things and so we
end we end up sitting a lot do you have
the stats on the increase in sedentary
behavior that is basically people being
still it's hard in terms of increase
because we we haven't measured time
spent sitting for very long that's
really been a pretty recent part of
research uh but we do know that today
people are sitting for on average N9 to
10 hours per day and that level of
sitting um is also linked with really
low levels of then being physically
active so um we can think about you know
how many of us are actually
active enough to meet the kinds of
guidelines that that are prescribed for
health um and we're talking about 25% of
us adults actually Meeting those
guidelines and that number hasn't
changed in in 20 years or so even with
all the messaging physical activity is
good for you you need to be more active
you need to exercise you know people
just don't do it I guess this the very
heart of this is this idea when we're
talking about the brain not just taking
care of itself without physical activity
is this notion that all parts of our
body and all parts of our being are
created in response pretty much or at
least develop in response to an external
stimuli of some sort so let me go into
the gym the example I gave earlier if I
pick up the weight then the muscle grows
and whenever I try and Implement a very
sudden behavioral change like when I
suddenly started training football four
times a week my my muscles basically
exploded in my feet because they just
weren't strong enough to deal with that
demand and I guess the same applies to
the brain that if we don't use it we we
lose it basically yeah I mean our our
bodies are uh fantastic at
tuning what we put energy into to
maintain to the kinds of activities that
we're that we're engaged in right and so
you know I like to think of our bodies
as great energy minimizers in some ways
that you know if you're not using
muscles those muscles will get smaller
because it takes energy to maintain that
tissue if you're not you know creating
the need for your heart to pump blood
across your body by exercising you'll
atrophy some of that tissue you'll
you'll reduce blood vessels your heart
will become less efficient because
you've signaled to your body that you
don't need that energy to put be put
into that tissue maintenance the same it
seems holds true for the brain that if
you're not active um in some way then
you're kind of signaling that you don't
need some of that uh energy to be put
into that tissue is all activity the
same so if I'm doing strength training
is that as beneficial for my brain as
potentially going for a run
Outdoors that's a great question and um
you know we there is not a ton of very
clear work that's compared directly
different types of activity in ways
where I could tell you for sure this is
the best one right there are data that
suggest that resistance training is
beneficial to the brain there's more
work on endurance activity and I
actually think that's probably because
it's easier to do rodent work on
endurance activity than resistance and
so trying to translate across those
models is a little bit easier both forms
of exercise have benefits they may be
through different Pathways um there may
be different biological mechanisms that
are underlying those benefits I've kind
of seen some cool work coming out lately
that has tried to look at uh for example
different types of endurance exercise so
there's a great study that came out are
you familiar with orienteering it's a
sport where you're given like a map and
a compass and you have to uh find your
way across a route as fast as possible
so it kind of mixes endurance activity
with spatial navigation and and uh
moving around your environment and
figuring out where you are typically
done outside right yeah always done
outside typically done on natural like
on trails and things but people do do it
in cities as well oh okay so like and
this is over miles in cles yeah this
would be like a like a trail run kind of
or something like that and there was a
great study that just came out looking
at um it was a randomized control trial
so they actually randomized people into
either an orientering group or a hiking
group or a control group and over a
couple months they found that the
orienteering group actually had uh
better performance on uh cognitive tests
like memory tests and executive function
tests than even the hiking group both of
those groups did better than the control
group but there was actually this extra
boost if they if for the people who were
in the orienteering group so we're
starting to see that maybe some
different activ ities could potentially
enhance the effects of exercise on the
brain what's the conclusion there what
does that study hint at in terms of
because hiking you're out in nature
you're navigating your way up a hill or
something
orientering that it's it's almost like
solving a puzzle right because you've
got a map and a compass yeah I mean I
think it it fits into an evolutionary
model at least in my mind um where the
purpose of being Physically Active is to
move around a habit to find things find
food find water find firewood um and so
physical activity in in this sort of
ecologically relevant world is a
combination of cognitive challenges and
physical challenges so I think that when
you combine them in the way that perhaps
orienteering does or maybe some other
sports you might actually get a bigger
boost for your buck a bigger bang for
your buck um in terms of the brain
benefits and that I think is rooted in
our evolutionary history like I said I
think that being active in an
evolutionary sense always comes with
sort of a cognitive challenge nobody's
ever just going out for a workout
there's no reason to if you're not if
you don't need to find something you're
going to relax and rest because you're
an energy minimizer right don't spend
that energy if you don't have to is
there any animal studies that show how
um have doing challenging exercise so
cognitively challenging exercise so
exercise that involves problem solving
improves our neuroplasticity or
increases our the amount of brain cells
we have across our brain yes yeah there
there have been and a great um impetus
for our work was some of the work done
in rodent studies um by a a professor
named ger Kerman um and he and his group
did some work in in Mouse models where
they combined uh access to running
Wheels with a very enriched cage
environment um so they looked at they
they did a very careful study where they
looked at some mice who were just living
in their cage you know normally a
control group they looked at mice that
were given access to a running wheel
they looked at mice that were given
access to this enriched environment
that's cognitively challenging and
things to play on and then they looked
at a combined group where they combined
the running wheel with the enriched
environment and they found this effect
where the combined environment doubled
the growth and survival of new neurons
compared to either wheel running alone
or cage enrichment alone so you got this
really cool ative effect um where you
where you really enhance the effects of
either one of those behaviors by
combining them if we can pull that
conclusion over to human life if we can
if one assumes that the same effect will
be seen in humans what does that then
tell us we should be doing if we if our
objective is to live long happy healthy
lives with fantastic brains what should
we then be doing exercise wise well I
think number one is just getting active
right so I think you know to me the
number one recommendation is you know to
be physically active and especially for
people who aren't that active right now
um the best thing they can do is get out
and and start walking um but if we want
to enhance the effects of physical
activity on the brain and build on this
animal work we're starting to see some
good evidence that if you do something
similar if you combine physical activity
with cognitive challenges you can boost
the effects of physical activity on um
on the brain on on especially cognitive
uh performance and so you know most of
the work has been in controlled
environments so we've done a study where
um we built a uh a game that you can
play while you're on an exercise machine
um so you combine exercise with
challenging activities right um and
we've shown that you can actually get a
bigger benefit for cognition when you do
that than when you just exercise or you
just play a game and so we can you know
take that and perhaps translate that
into the real world and think about way
that you can make your exercise more
cognitively challenging so can you go
out and and um challenge yourself
spatially take new Roots right
oftentimes especially runners or or
Walkers they just do the same route
every time or same they have two or
three rootes that they do every time
depending on how long they want to go
but maybe we should be challenging
ourselves a little more right maybe we
should take new routes where you get a
little lost and then have to find your
way back right I'm someone that runs on
the treadmill but Jack over there he
runs Outdoors so you're telling me sort
of Topline that Jack is serving his
brain more than I am when I'm just on
that same treadmill every day in my
hotel room while I'm out here in New
York whereas he's running around Central
Park it's possible so I think there's
there's a couple things um you know
running on a treadmill may end up being
a little more like running on a running
wheel for a mouse without the extra
enrichment and yeah running outside May
provide some of those better benefits we
also know that running outside actually
has a lot more more uh benefits than
just maybe cognition but also seems to
boost mood a little bit more than
running or exercising in more
impoverished environments you know Cog
really yes so there's like there's a
research movement called the green
exercise movement that is uh focused on
uh the impact of exercising in green
spaces versus um more urban environments
or or indoors on exercise equipment and
I don't want to scare anybody said
exercise is great if if you if running
on a treadmill works for someone's
lifestyle it is fantastic exercise right
but you know what I mean I could go
outside so the only reason I'm not is
because I don't know the difference and
so you know it's for someone like me of
course I could have gone outside this
morning instead of just um being on the
treadmill but I've I I thought they were
the same so you're telling me that there
is potentially some upside according to
research and me getting outside and
running in both mood and neuroplasticity
makes me go okay tomorrow a different
decision absolutely I think that I mean
to me that's the really surprising
outcome of a lot of This research is
that uh moving outside and especially
moving in green spaces so moving in um
Parks or near Parks or uh moving on
Trails things like that seems to uh have
bigger benefits especially for mood we
don't know yet about the cognitive
benefits that's our hypothesis but
certainly uh some of the research out
there suggests that for mood and
feelings of well-being moving your body
in a green space provides a little bit
extra benefit than moving in um in like
I said in city streets or in in indoors
one of the things I notice all the time
is if I exercise before I do this
podcast my brain just seems to work yeah
whereas if I get out of bed and I don't
exercise and then I come and do this
podcast it's like the words just don't
go from my brain to my mouth properly
yeah I mean that's why I got into this
right because I started noticing the
same thing and I started noticing how
much better I felt after I exercised and
you know and and to this day right I
mean my wife knows when I didn't go for
a run in the morning right I'm not that
Pleasant of a person to be around the
rest of the day what is going on there
do you do you know the sort of
physiological reason why it feels like
if I exercise in the morning before I
have a two-hour conversation my brain
and mouth seem to be connected one of
the things that I I think is happening
is that um you've activated uh reward
centers in your brain that have
increased your arousal right they you've
activated these centers in your brain um
that are making you feel good and when
we feel good we feel more confident um
we're not as sort of stuck in our heads
we're not as we're more present um but I
think that is rooted in the rewarding
sensations of exercise right it it makes
us feel better and when you feel better
you function better across all aspects
of your body of of your life um and
those rewards are molecular rewards that
are that are popping up it's there's
there's similarities with um with how
people feel when they use certain drugs
they're activating similar receptors in
your brain as when you're using certain
drugs although to a much lower extent um
and it's really it's making you you know
sharper and and making you more
confident and making you feel better is
there a optimal time of day to exercise
I know to your point um about any
exercise is better than no exercise but
is there an optimal time to exercise I
mean when do you exercise and why well I
exercise first thing in the morning why
um because I will feel better all day
right and so I mean there's two reasons
I think one if I save exercise for later
in the day there's a greater chance that
things will come up and I'll you know
I'll I'll find excuses not to but mainly
it's because first thing in the morning
if I exercise my whole day is better
right and so that's the motivation to
get out of bed for me and and get out
the door is I literally think about how
I will feel if I don't do it um because
sometimes it's cold sometimes you don't
it's dark you know this time of year you
don't want to do it but if I think about
how feel the rest of the day um that's a
big motivator and people might hear this
and they they might be starting from
zero right they might not be excising at
all what would you say to those people
not to be intimidated by the advice out
there about how much you have to
exercise because it's actually
surprising how little you need to
exercise to gain benefits um so if
you're starting from zero the biggest
bang for your buck from a public health
standpoint are people who are starting
from almost zero and just starting to
exercise a little bit right just getting
out the door and taking a thousand steps
right something like that you know those
those sorts of uh small amounts going
from zero to two three 4,000 steps per
day of exercise that's that's the
biggest public health benefit then you
start to see diminishing returns right
so if you're if you're already
exercising a lot and you and you want to
bump it up a little higher you know the
amount of benefit you get is is smaller
than going from very little to to more
but I think that's the I mean that's the
surprising thing for me is that you know
if you if you are not an exerciser
getting four or 5,000 steps per day is
going to give you a big cardiovascular
benefit and a big benefit for your brain
you've studied some of the tribes around
the world so the hatza tribe right is
correct yes what what work have you done
with them and when did that research
begin so I started working with uh the
hza and
2009 that was my first time out there
and we've been working with them and
interested in um what kinds of um Health
impacts you see in a hun in the context
of a hunting and Gathering lifestyle and
they live in what part of the world so
they live in northern Tanzania why did
you want to spend time with them so the
hodza uh provide a window into what a
hunting and Gathering lifestyle looks
like and so if you work with individuals
who are still um pretty much full-time
hunting and Gathering um they give you a
view of how much physical activity does
it take to be a hunter gatherer for
example and how does that relate to
biomarkers of cardiovascular health or
how does that relate to their cognition
um how does this lifestyle impact the
way that they age and the hodza give us
this really important view of what that
lifestyle is like in terms of behavior
and activity and and um and aging is
there a op timal amount of exercise
that's in line with our sort of
evolutionary past we said you know that
we've evolved to be active was is there
like an average amount I mean do we see
this in the hatza tribes do we have any
clues from history yeah I mean it so we
can look at what living hunter gatherers
do and that provides us with kind of a
clue as to what that lifestyle um might
entail and I like I do like to think
about things in terms of steps per day
often because that's an easy metric for
people to kind of understand and Trav
for themselves there are more
complicated ways to to measure physical
activity but steps is a good one step
counts and so um the hodza that as we've
measured their step counts are getting a
lot so it's like you know 15 to 20,000
steps per day in that range which is
quite a bit of of movement and that's
not to say that that is the optimal
amount um but that's what we see in
hunting and Gathering Lifestyles the
benefits that we get from a public
health standpoint start to occur at much
smaller levels right so you know four
five 6,000 steps per day you start to
see some real benefits and as I said you
start to maybe see diminishing returns
as you get higher and higher levels so
what's what what we see in the past or
see in living Hunter gathers may be
quite different than what's necessarily
you know optimal for our health in terms
of you know where are we going to get
the most benefit and and where do we
start to Trail off with the hazer is
that across all age groups or is that
yeah I mean there is a decline in IAL
activity with age that's clear but um
but even older adults we we've measured
physical activity in adults in their 70s
and even their early 80s and they're
still far exceeding what we do in in in
uh in the US or the UK or by factor of a
lot of times the way that we measure
physical activity is in terms of um how
much time they spend in moderate or
vigorous intensity activity um so these
are kind of activities that are that get
your heart rate up up to about 50 55%
plus of your of your maximum heart rate
and older adults are still engaging in
60 70 80 minutes per day of that kind of
activity whereas say in the US you might
see older adults on average engaging in
two to four minutes per day of that
level of activity to four yeah so on
average right for for older adults so we
just don't see as much physical activity
in in the US like I said before only 25%
of adults in the US meet physical
activity guidelines and physical
activity guidelines here are 150 minutes
per week of moderate to vigorous
physical activity so in the US 25% of
adults meet those guidelines in the
hodza uh those that we've measured are
meeting weekly physical activity
guidelines on average in two days so
they're getting 300 minutes of physical
activity in a couple days versus you
know adults the US who aren't coming
close to that one of the biggest Killers
I think maybe the biggest killer of
people in the US and I believe in the UK
as well is cardiovascular diseases yeah
that is am I right in thinking that is
the single biggest that's the disease
you're most likely to die from yes I
believe so when we look at the hadza how
are they doing in terms of
cardiovascular illness so we don't see a
lot of evidence of uh disease risk so we
we have not yet measured cardiovascular
outcomes like we haven't measured
mortality for example from
cardiovascular disease but we have
measured uh biomarkers so things like
cholesterol levels triglyceride levels
um blood pressure so looked at whether
there's hypertension and we see very
little evidence of cardiovascular
disease um in this group others other
researchers have looked at other groups
so um there's a long-term study of a
group in South America called the
chimane um that have been studied in a
lot of detail and there they found
almost no evidence of cardiovascular
disease and they've been able to look in
a much more detailed way at at outcomes
like you know death from cardiovascular
disease and they see almost no evidence
of of high levels of cardiovascular
disease diabetes very little evidence of
diabetes very little evidence of
dementia I mean these diseases that we
look at as inevitable parts of Aging
they're just not right they are not
inevitable a lot of them are a product
of our lifestyle and you know I'm I'm
most familiar with dementia and
something like 40% of risk of dementia
is preventable it's due to
Lifestyle right we have the ability to
modify our risk in really big Ways by
altering the way we live what else has
inspired you or caused you to implement
behavioral changes into your life new
habits based on your work researching
the hadza tribe is there anything at all
that has either changed your mind or
modified how you live your life yeah I
mean I think a couple of things um
number one um physical activity is is
sort of the Cornerstone of my life
that's sort of that is that is um that's
been driven by my personal sort of uh
enjoyment of it but also from a research
standpoint that's been really motivating
to maintain an active lifestyle um
across these years but more recently
I've been really interested in sitting
um which is you know in some ways um
it's it's not really the opposite of
being Physically Active um but it's
another behavior that we engage in
actually for much more time per day than
than anybody's physically active and um
we've done a lot of work on resting
behaviors in the hza and that's been an
area that I that I've sort of tried to
pull into my life as well is um trying
to understand you know how sitting can
impact our lives and then how our
evolutionary biology May uh may be
tweaked by by this behavior and so I've
tried to implement some things like
trying not to sit too long trying to
break up my sitting um finding ways to
to um to not be stuck on in a chair all
day um and a lot of that's driven by by
my research what's uh what's the issue
with sitting so sitting is um sitting is
a beautiful thing right I mean we're
doing it right now it's really
comfortable and the reason it's
comfortable is because we've basically
taken all of the load off of our lower
body so we're we're supporting ourselves
in these chairs right you got to move
around you mention you know when I give
talks about sitting all of a sudden I
start seeing people fidgeting right some
people get up and and stand up in the
back um so you know you take the load
off of your lower legs and your muscles
don't have to work and you know not
surprisingly that super comfortable
we're not working hard um but the same
time what's happening is the our muscles
not being active means that what we
normally do to fuel muscle activity
which is you know we break up
triglycerides in our bloodstream and
that's you know that's those are broken
up into fatty acids that fuel muscle
activity that's not happening and so
those those fuels now build up in our in
our blood vessels and that's associated
with cardiovascular disease so sitting
for long periods of time is associated
with some negative Health outcomes and
one of the things that we've learned
from working with the hodza is that you
know people rest a lot like the hodza
they sit for as rest and sit for as long
as we do which was actually super
surprising to us we thought that
wouldn't be the case we thought they
were going to be active you know all the
time and there would be much less
sitting but when we finally actually
measured it with accelerometers um
they're resting for the same amount of
time that we are but they're not sitting
in chairs they're resting in postures
that require a little muscle activity so
they're squatting or they're they're
kneeling or they're sitting on the
ground in ways that you know you have to
kind of keep shifting your body around
and it's possible that just that kind of
low level of muscle activity um is is
how our bodies are well adapted to rest
and what's weird is the invention of
chairs and what's weird is the invention
of these objects that completely
eliminate the need for our lower bodies
to use muscle activity chairs a fairly
new invention when when did chairs come
into the picture the first chairs that
we know about from the archeological
record are about 5,000 years old um but
you know the ubiquitous use of chairs is
is probably even more recent than that
right chairs are chairs are these weird
objects that they're not only you know
ergonomic and and and made for you know
our comfort but they also over history
have had implications for economic
status and power and you know taking a
seat at the table and a throne in in you
know in in terms of political power um
where you sit has always been important
from a political and and economic and
social standpoint so um chairs have have
sort of Taken on a big part of our lives
and if you you know if you walk into
someone's house you know generally the
first thing that you're seeing is there
seating environment right chairs and
couches and um and and places to sit are
part of the way we design our world um
we don't think about them that often but
we use them more than almost any other
object in our lives it's kind of like we
assume they've just always been a thing
it's most of these things in our life we
assume that this is just the way it's
always been and this is therefore normal
and acceptable but it must be pretty
Illuminating to go and see these tribes
who they must think we're crazy they
must think we're so strange by the
things that we do I mean they do but at
the same time you know when we work in
in Hodel land we bring chairs because
they're comfortable and you know the the
first thing that happens when we're out
there is you know this crazy game of
musical chairs that if one of us gets up
you know someone comes over and sits in
our chair and why is that because
they're super comfortable um and so I I
don't think they they necessarily think
we're crazy I think they they they you
know they enjoy sitting in the chairs um
they just don't have them be careful not
to leave any of them that well that's
what you know that's what happens is you
know we'll go out for the day and and go
you know go um you know foraging with
people and and come back and you know
you can't find you want to sit down and
you can't find a chair because
everyone's sitting in your chair but
that's totally fine they they deserve to
rest just as much or more than than
anybody else what's the Practical advice
do you think there for for employers for
people that work at home for people that
sit in chairs often because we people
can't just know we can't just do this
podcast squatting right when we could
but you know what I'm saying very
challenging it' be very very challenging
is there some kind of Middle Ground that
is um accessible and realistic for us
yeah I think the I think the best thing
people can do is just try not to sit for
prolonged periods of time I mean there's
no way to eliminate sitting and I don't
think that standing all day is is
necessarily the answer I don't think
that that's necessarily A a benefit
full-time I think breaking up sitting
into smaller periods is probably the
best thing we can do um so you know one
of the pieces of advice is is actually
that I always tell people is you know
just drink more water so you got to get
up and pee more um that is that's an
easy way to to kind of force yourself
not to sit for two hours at a time but
you know having those kinds of reminders
that you should get up move around um
there's been this popular notion of take
an exercise snack break so you know
every 30 minutes every 45 minutes get up
and walk up a staircase or do some
push-ups or something just to get your
body moving get your muscles working do
some squats um and so that can be you
know really beneficial some people will
hear that and go yeah but if just doing
just getting up and doing a two-minute
walk how's that going to help in the
grand scheme of things there's really
good evidence so okay couple things um
from an epidemiological standpoint
there's been this really great work
coming out on um something that's called
vigorous intermittent physical activity
um so this is um activity that's not
purposeful it's short in duration but
it's vigorous so going up the stairs or
walking really briskly for like a minute
or two that in the long run people that
do that often have a lower risk of
mortality and a lower risk of
cardiovascular disease regardless of
purposeful physical activity right so
you can actually get big benefits by
just doing these short bursts of
activity walking to get your lunch or at
a vigorous Pace at a vigorous Pace yeah
I mean walking to get your lunch is
great but you get a little bit more
benefit from doing it at a vigorous pace
so you know if you're walking and you
can't sing at the same time or you can't
talk at the same time that's that's now
you're getting into kind of a vigorous
intensity um and there's also been
randomized control trials where people
have actually in the lab had people sit
for you know eight hours not do anything
and then they've taken those same people
on another day and had them sit but
break it up into you know 20 minutes
break it up and walk on a treadmill for
two minutes something like that and
those Studies have shown changes in
cardi metabolic markers so they've shown
shown changes in um insulin levels and
changes in um in triglyceride levels and
and cardiovascular disease biomarkers
just from breaking up your sitting in
into into shorter periods so you really
can have a a profound effect I think on
your health um by implementing some of
these small changes is there you know a
type of EX we touched on this a little
bit earlier on but I'm really trying to
make a case to myself that I should be
doing more ER iic exercise then I
typically do a little bit of aerobic
exercise um unless I'm training for
something in particular and a lot of
sort of resistance training is there any
case that I should be doing more aerobic
exercise or resistance training if my
goal is to improve my brain my memory my
cognition I think I mean I think both
are important um from from my
perspective aerobic activity you know
we're we're thinking about this from an
evolutionary standpoint right we've been
talking about this idea of can we boost
the effects of exercise by adding
cognitive challenges right and so from
my perspective aerobic activity is
probably the place where you can do that
um in the easiest way um so by moving
yourself outside in new environments um
by adding in some some spatial
navigation challenges to a workout you
might be able to do that a little easier
than than when you're lifting weights
you know this whole brain training
industry that emerged I think it emerged
like 10 years ago and there became all
of these apps that were kind of like
puzzles and stuff and they claimed that
if you use these apps and do this brain
training stuff then it will um make your
memory better your IQ higher all of
these things is there any Merit to these
brain training games there does appear
to be some um so there do appear to be
some training games that that do improve
aspects of um of cognition you know it's
been a it's been a tough industry
because not all of the studies are super
high quality um and and some of the
claims can be a little bit further ahead
of maybe where the science is so are the
effects that big like if you do it you
know every day and you invest all this
time are you going to get the biggest
effect um but there does appear to be
some benefit you know if I were in a
perfect world would I be doing
everything I could um to save off the
potential for developing dementia yes
and so if there's a little bit of
evidence that that could be helpful I
would I would definitely jump in and do
it just learning generally yeah learning
so
learning
education um keeping yourself
cognitively challenged throughout your
lifespan is clearly um a way to keep
staving off cognitive decline is there
research to support the idea that
learning or reading or some kind
education for sure for sure and and you
know education is a difficult one
because education is wrapped up in a lot
of other things right so education is
wrapped up in um your parents and
socioeconomic class and so when we study
education from an epidemiological
standpoint it's really hard to deal with
um the kinds of other variables that
could confound those relationships but
certainly lifelong learning seems to be
associated with better reserve so one of
the things that we think about in terms
of cognitive aging is how much Reserve
do you build up over the course of your
lifespan so that as we undergo some
atrophy and decline which isn't which is
kind of inevitable um have you built up
enough Reserve so that that decline
doesn't impact your daily life right you
you have enough of this builtup tissue
and built up reserve and built up
connections um that even if you undergo
some decline or in in tissue it doesn't
impact you reserve being kind of like
Pathways is that Reserve could be
Pathways right it could be volume volume
so it could be a bigger hippocampus or
it could be the connections between your
hippocampus and and other parts of the
brain and both of those are are
important and you can build those up
across your lifespan with physical
activity with um cognitive engagement um
things like that and with avoiding some
of the sort of negative health behavior
like smoking or excessive alcohol use
does excessive alcohol use and smoking
shrink the brain they do they are they
are risk factors in cognitive decline
and the development of dementia and
Alzheimer's disease how much alcohol we
know that excessive like you know
excessive consumption over the sort of
one drink per day or two drinks per day
for a man one drink per day for a woman
um that level of alcohol consumption is
associated with negative Health outcomes
including risk of dementia and
Alzheimer's disease is so sleep is the
other one that's a big a big factor in
cognitive decline right it is and sleep
I mean a lot of things happen during
sleep um that are really important one
of the things that happens during sleep
we think is that um it's a time where
your brain is clearing these plaques
that can build up that are associated
with um neurodegenerative disease and so
if that's the case and there's been some
evidence that suggests that that sleep
is when some of that clearance is
happening then poor Sleep
Quality just doesn't allow that function
to occur allows those uh plaques to
build up sleep is weird in some ways
because it's not always more is better
so uh it follows a U-shaped curve in
terms of risk of developing dementia for
example where less sleep
and lots of sleep are both associated
with higher risk and there's like a
sweet spot right there's a sweet spot of
you know call it seven to nine hours a
night something like that um that that's
that is where your lowest risk is going
to be so you can over sleep you can
Here's the the the the caveat to that is
what's going on with overs sleepers that
you're not able to sus out in your
analysis so a lot of times people
oversleep because they're depressed and
we know depression is linked with these
neurodegenerative diseases and so it's
it's possible that it's those it's not
the actual sleep itself but it's what's
linked with too much sleep like
inactivity they might not be exercising
as much as other yeah what are you
displacing so another yeah that's a
great Point another thing that we can
look at is you know you have 24 hours in
a day right and so if you sit for an
extra hour that's going to come at the
expense of something else if you sleep
for an extra hour yeah or exercise or
light physical activity just housework
or something um so you can't the day is
not infinite so anything that you choose
to do is displacing something else what
about having friends yeah having a
partner you know does that is that going
to increase my chances of having a great
cognitive function in a big brain well
it depends on how good your relationship
is so I mean just having a partner
sometimes you know if it's if it's there
are ways that that can be associated
with negative outcome comes if if your
relationship is is challenging right um
but you know so I I think of healthy
aging as linked to really three main
behaviors diet physical activity and
social connections okay social
connections are key and so you know
we're hearing now there's a kind of a
buzzword the epidemic of loneliness
especially coming out of the pandemic
years that is really um it's kind of
frightening because people have gotten
more used to sort of living alone and
being alone um and those social
connections are a key aspect of
maintaining a healthy brain when we age
we know that um and how do we know well
mainly from epidemiology there's two
ways to two ways to analyze these these
these questions there are are randomized
control trials and sort of observational
trials it's really hard to do randomized
control trials on loneliness and and
look at long-term outcome so we look at
observational data and people who have
stronger social connections who have um
it's not necessarily more but it's it's
higher quality social connections who
you know if you ask them if they have
people they can confide in they'll say
Yes um those people tend to have better
brain outcomes than people who who don't
have those connections and if you think
about it again I I don't want to make a
a sort of an easy evolutionary argument
where we just say this is how we evolved
so this is how we live should live now
but I mean if you think about our
evolutionary history for for the most
part we lived in a in a time where
social connections were imperative to
survival right I mean if you are living
in a in a hunting and Gathering
lifestyle you know you need those social
connections you can't guarantee that you
will find food every day so you need to
have connections with other people who
you trust and they trust who you're
willing to share with right and so those
social connections become um become
inextricably linked to your health does
pollution have an impact on our
cognitive performance yeah that's been
so that's been a surprising and really
kind of sad result of a lot of research
lately is that air pollution um has real
negative impacts on brain aging um and
we've seen that in acute studies where
people have looked at um the effects of
you know what's going on in your in your
peripheral blood when you commute in
traffic right when you ride your bike in
traffic um but also from an
epidemiological standpoint people who
are living in areas with higher air
pollution have a higher risk of
developing Alzheimer's disease and other
dementias um one of the things that
we've done some work on we were really
interested in whether physical activity
either could you know diminish those
impacts of air pollution on the brain
but also we were thinking well when
you're active you're breathing more
right you're your your your respiration
increases so you're breathing in more uh
pollution more particles so could that
actually you know have an impact on the
benefits of activity on your brain and
we found we we've looked at a look at
this in a couple ways and both for some
brain structural outcomes and for risk
of dementia exercising in or being
physically active in in an area with
even moderate levels of air pollution
diminishes the benefits of physical
activity on the brain which is a real
bummer especially for me I live in Los
Angeles which is a very uh it's an area
with a lot of air pollution and um and
so being physically active in that
environment when there's a lot of
pollution in the air um it doesn't it
doesn't make your health outcome worse
but it diminishes the benefits of
physical activity so if you go for a a
run in the middle of London for example
or in the middle of New York City the
cognitive benefits are diminished that's
what we're seeing in the data we're
seeing and in fact the study that we did
was was uh from data uh based in the UK
where you know we're not seeing the
kinds of levels of pollution that we see
in some other cities around the world
where it's really drastic or even in Los
Angeles where it's much higher levels of
pollution than we'd see in say London
but even in those levels with more
moderate levels of air pollution um
people who are active in in higher
levels of air pollution don't show the
same brain benefits as people who are
active in areas with lower pollution I
had my brain scanned uh what two months
ago now and it was okay okay it wasn't
amazing it what do you mean by okay I
mean he just told me there was room for
improvement in terms of like some things
he saw in my brain he also diagnosed me
with ADHD following that and a few other
questionnaires and and things one of the
things in my sort of
prescription that he asked me to do more
of was racket Sports interesting okay he
said if you do this list of things that
he's asked me to do things like
hyperbaric chambers and blah blah blah
blah blah blah and Racket Sports um
we'll see an increase in certain parts
of your brain now that somewhat ties
into what you're saying with doing this
physical activity but pairing it with
some kind of cognitive challenge racket
Sports seems like a prime example it's
actually it's funny it it is the number
one question I get after I give a talk
is about tennis and I think I probably
you know I give talks a lot in in you
know to communities with you know more a
sometimes more affluent older adults who
probably play a lot of tennis and but it
is you know it's an activity that people
play can play later in life you know um
and um and it does involve a lot of
strategic thinking it involves a lot of
fast reactions and it involves aerobic
activity um and so it is it's a great
Contender and you're doing and you're
doing with someone it's social um
oftentimes especially U when you get a
little older you play doubles um so you
don't have to run the court as much what
are the other questions people after
hearing you speak what are the other
questions that people often are most
curious about how much activity that's
the big one right how much do I have to
do do I have to do right that's way
people think about it yeah and you know
I think have to do yeah and it it it's
it sort of does bum me out to frame it
that way because um because I think of
physical activity as as something that
as as we were just talking about it
improves your whole day um it's
something that many of us want to do
because of that right and so I think you
know first the first thing I always tell
people is find the activity you want to
do because that's the one you'll keep
doing and so don't look for the perfect
right if running a treadmill makes you
crazy and you don't want to do it then
you won't keep it up um if playing
tennis does it for you maybe it's not
the best if we fig you know if we can
even figure out what that means but
you're going to do it for the rest of
your life then by all means that's the
one to do and so I think that is the
first thing that everyone should be
thinking about is you know what do you
what do you what makes you excited to
get out the door and do um and don't
worry about what's best what is the
research that you've done that you're
most proud of or that surpris surprised
you the most because you know I've I've
been looking through your work and found
different things that I found
interesting but um I must have missed
something that you find really
fascinating well one of the things that
I found really surprising was actually
it was it's now been a while it's been
like over over a decade ago I did some
work on um the endoc canabo system um
and the endoc canabo system is our
body's uh sort of natural form of
marijuana you know we produce these uh
chemicals that activate brain receptors
the same way that the active ingredient
in marijuana um activates and so um it
turns out that exercise upregulates the
same system um these endoc canabo and
that may be why at least partially why
exercise makes people feel good um and
one of the studies that we did like I
said about 10 11 years ago now uh was we
found that the same thing that we get
from exercise in terms of endoc canabo
signaling dogs also get that and I'm I'm
a dog dog lover and I know my dog loves
to exercise and she's you know bummed
out if she can't get her her her walk
and run in for the day and I think
there's something similar going on it's
these similar rewarding mechanisms that
make them feel good that that makes us
feel good so that was one um one really
fun and and interesting kind of finding
that I think has some implications right
it's it's if if if we can find those
activities that generate those rewards
we're going to want to do that more
often and it also provides a sort of
physiological explanation as to why some
people who don't exercise or aren't able
to exercise can often have depressive
symptoms agree I totally agree yeah and
I think these biological mechanisms that
can that can make you feel better when
you exercise they don't always kick in
right away right and so I also think
they can be a that can be a little bit
of a barrier to someone who's not active
that you know if you just get up and
start exercising you know maybe it takes
a little bit of time for these things to
kick in you have to be able to stay
within a certain intensity level and
maybe if you're not very fit you kind of
overshoot that and you you end up going
too too intense and you don't get those
same sort of mild benefits that just
make you feel good all day right I think
one of the things that people need to
kind of keep in mind is is maybe try to
stick with it long enough to get a
little bit of Fitness so you can reap
those rewards they'll come you just need
to just give it some time right have you
got any hypothesis that you're working
on at the moment that you have haven't
been able to prove out yet but you know
as someone that's a researcher and
that's insanely curious there must be
things in your mind that you're thinking
I'd love to do a study on that to figure
out if that's true yeah I mean so a
couple things I mean one we are not done
with the combining cognitive challenges
with physical activity I think that is a
really um a really exciting area and
it's it's early on so I think the the
work that we've done and others have
done is in its infancy and how we can
boost the the the brain benefits of
exercise and that's sort of that's going
to be a big part of our work going
forward is what can we do to really um
make exercise a little more cognitively
challenging and get those benefits um
the area that I'm that I'm really
interested in now um is the effects of
sitting on the brain and um what are the
mechanisms that link too much time spent
sitting with brain health and how can we
kind of manage that a little bit better
you know when we think about
exercise participation and I've been
saying you know 25% of adults engage in
in uh the guidelines for physical
activity levels in the US that number
hasn't changed over the last you know
couple decades all the messaging I mean
you know would you could you ever meet
someone who doesn't know that physical
activity is important to do but still
75% of people don't exercise and so I
don't know what it'll take to to change
that number but I think maybe we can
look at other behaviors that we can
change and sitting is something that
everyone does and so that I think is a
really nice place to focus to move the
needle a little bit so can we get people
to sit less what are the kinds of
interventions we can Implement that can
get people to to reduce their time spent
sitting and will that pay off in terms
of brain health and I think that's it's
a big question we know that time spent
sitting is associated with risk of
dementia we just we just did a big study
looking at you know if you if you sit
for 10 hours a day
compared to nine hours a day it's about
a 10% increased risk of dementia if you
sit for 12 hours a day it's about a 60%
increase risk of dementia compared to
sitting for N9 n and a half% 60% versus
9 hours a day right so just a couple
more hours right it's it's a nonlinear
relationship so once you get past about
nine nine and a half hours a day your
risks start going up in in a nonlinear
exponential way and so can we alter that
can can we I mean it doesn't it doesn't
take a lot necessarily to go from 12 to
8 hours a day so maybe that's easier
than getting people out the door maybe
we can find some find some intervention
so that's what I'm really excited about
is you know some of some lowcost ideas
some low investment ideas for people um
that could maybe have a big impact on
the way they age I'm thinking about all
kinds of chairs that vibrate and give
you an electric shock I'm thinking of
how we can Implement that into
which is aany involved in totally yeah I
mean reminders are one way right I mean
I think tracking um your behavior I mean
there it's not going to work for
everybody but certainly tracking your
time spent sitting for a couple weeks
might actually give you a little bit of
motivation once you realize just how
much time you spend on these
chairs what is brain foods is is there
such thing as a brain food I think I
much the reason I take aega is because
people tell me it's good for your brain
yeah I don't you know I don't think
there's a magic pill um I you know I
think the best evidence that we have
right now is um is more plant-based less
meat-based especially less processed
meat more plant-based more plant-based
foods and and Less meat Less meat yeah
here's where the difficulty lies in all
of this research to study brain health
you need to observe people over long
periods of time and so you can't
Implement a a 10-year diet intervention
just nobody will follow it so all of the
research that's really um strong in this
area is asking people to report what
they eat and then tracking what happens
to them over time so it's it's difficult
work but the best evidence is that
aspects of the Mediterranean diet seem
to be linked with better brain outcomes
so more plant-based more um more legumes
more whole grains less processed food
Less meat less sugar these are you know
these are the obvious dietary
interventions right and I think they're
they're obvious for a reason because
they seem to be so good for so much of
our bodies and you know so much of our
cardiovascular metabolic health and our
brain health if there was one
fundamental misunderstanding that most
people have that your work and your
experience has um rebutted I guess what
is that fundamental human
misunderstanding about the nature of our
bodies and how we're supposed to be
living to be optimal I think I think the
most dangerous misunderstanding is how
much exercise it takes to get benefits
right and I think that's because that
acts as a barrier to people and what
we've seen from the epidemiological work
is that you know the the there are
minimal amounts of activity that provide
big benefits more is generally better
but you can get huge benefits just by
moving your body a little bit every day
and so I think that's you know as I said
it's a dangerous misconception because
it's a barrier when someone thinks when
someone doesn't exercise at all and
thinks I need to get 12,000 steps per
day and I'm tracking it and I'm getting
3,000 that's a pretty big gap and that's
one that maybe you don't think you can
fill but if you're getting 3,000 and you
think if I get to 5,000 I'm gonna get a
big benefit that's motivating right it's
so true that sometimes going from zero
to one feels
so hm inconsequential and somewhat
embarrassing that we just don't do it
because we I think many people think of
0 to one as like zero to a five day a
week gym attendance record right which
is just like climbing Mount Everest in
your mind it's just so far away that
there's going to be so much
psychological discomfort it's going to
result in procrastination you're going
to do something else and you're going to
avoid it but if we reframe that to zero
to one being walking for your lunch yeah
and that as the starting point and then
one to two being as you said going from
1,000 steps to maybe 2,000 steps feels
like something everyone can do but we
just don't think it's important we think
it's totally inconsequential to go for a
walk as opposed to um you know just
sitting down and ordering our food on an
app yeah something that I I think about
a lot because even as someone like me
that I I go to the gym you know um as
frequently as I possibly can however
there are some days like today where I'm
extremely busy where I might have said I
was going to go to the gym lateer at
night and I either think to my myself
that there's no middle ground I think
that's either going to the gym and
working really hard or [__] it yeah yeah
there's great middle ground though yeah
you can run up the stairs on your way to
bed right you know I mean you really or
you you know you can do these exercise
snacks but I like to think of the the
things that you're talking about you
know walk to lunch instead of ordering
in you think that's not important maybe
it's life-changing for some people it
will literally change your life if if
you are doing very little and you take
that first step you know it can change
everything about your you know your
future in some ways um because it builds
the foundation for oh that feels good
maybe I'll try a little bit more right
maybe I'll try a little bit more you
know we were talking earlier you were
saying you know you implement a new
exercise regimen and you jump in with
everything and then you end up you know
getting a achilles tendon injury or
something like that you know that's
especially true of people who don't
exercise at all and so you know the best
thing to do is to start slowly and
really start reaping those rewards
because that's the motivator and so yeah
I mean I think if you are exercising a
lot you know day that gets away from you
and you can't make it to the gym I mean
getting a little bit of vigorous
activity going for a really brisk walk
going up the stairs doing some pushup I
mean anything is going to give you a
little bit of benefit um you know these
are really easy things that we can
Implement into our lives quick one from
one of our sponsors a lot of you have
asked me the question about Hu over the
years about where heel fits into your
life is it the most healthy choice one
can make when they're thinking about
what their nutrition and here's what I
would say to all of those people I think
in an Ideal World I would be able to sit
down and cook and prepare all of my
meals I think that would be my ideal
option but it because of the nature of
my life because I'm moving around often
what used to happen before hu was I'd
end up making bad choices I'd end up
snacking I'd have junk food options on
the because I was busy and my nutrition
would come second to whatever my
professional priority was what hu allows
you to do is to have a healthier option
on the go that is convenient that
contains a lot of the nutrients that you
need to have a complete diet and that's
exactly where it fits in my life they've
now expanded the range if you haven't
yet checked out the hu RTD I highly
recommend you do go to your local Tesco
boots or SS spres or online and you can
grab and try one there does Alzheimer's
exist on a spectrum per se and is is
what one end of that Spectrum sort of
just general cognitive decline and
memory reduction because I sometimes
wonder obviously my job here is to I
interview very intelligent people and
those people come in all shapes sizes
and ages and I obviously as an observer
notice how some of the older people that
I meet are
incredibly
sharp you know arguably significantly
sharper than I am and I'm you know in
some cas is 30% 40% of their age 40% of
their age um and they're just
unbelievably sharp and then we've also
all had experiences maybe with an elder
relative or you know someone slightly
older where you can see that that their
memory recall or their sort of it's
almost sometimes you experience it as
their self-awareness has started to wne
they might tell you a short story in one
hour if you know what I'm saying they
might they just it's almost like the
self-awareness of what they're saying
and how they're saying it and their
ability articulate themselves has some
somewhat slipped away and I wonder if
that exists on this scale of Dementia or
whether that's just general atrophy as
you call it of the brain right and I
don't I really really want to be someone
as I'm sure we all do that has my brain
works until the day that I die yeah you
know yeah we all want that yeah we all
want that and of course and I that's why
I wonder if it's the Spectrum or is it
is a spectrum yeah I mean so there's
sort of a a a a normal amount of of
cognitive change that happens with aging
in most people um that in general should
not impact your daily life greatly right
you should still be able to do all the
things you want to do navigate your
world in the way that you want to you
may have some you know it's inevitable
that there will be some memory changes
um some changes in your in your
executive functions planning but not the
kinds of profound changes that we see in
people with dementia and so dementia is
is is cognitive decline that impacts
your daily life in in a way that makes
it hard hard to keep doing the things
you want to do um when you start to get
down into sort of the nitty-gritty of
different types of dementia you know
Alzheimer's disease which is by far the
most common has a lot of pathological
features that make it a progressive
disease right that that mean you know
you will continue to decline um over
over the course of the disease and
there's no way to stop it really that we
know of but there is going to be there's
always going to be some change in your
brain with age that you can't fully stop
for most people I've also always
wondered about this is totally random
but I said this a few times to a few
people this idea that when a spouse or a
partner passes away people seem to go
into pretty quick cognitive decline and
their sort of mortality risk seems to
multiply and that could be a very
complex thing to do with cortisol and
other things going on in the body and
hormones and but I wondered if there was
accelerated atrophy if my if I'm 85 and
my wife passes away yeah so I mean a
couple things are going on Grief in
itself is associated with brain changes
um there's been interesting work on that
brain changes yeah I mean that there are
cognitive changes and and structural
changes that happen when you're grieving
I think some of this is depression as
well that's clear and one of the things
you know untreated depression can start
to look a lot like dementia it's a risk
factor for dementia but it can also look
like dementia because when you are
undergoing um depression a lot of things
happen you stop paying attention when
you're talking to people you're you're
you're you're not as present and so you
know what can sometimes seem like a
memory deficit might be because you
weren't pay able to pay attention to
what was going on in the first place and
so I think one of the things that I
worry about with older adults a lot is
making sure that depression is treated
because especially when there are
cognitive challenges that they're that
they're experiencing they're they're
feeling like they're have declines in
their thinking and memory skills making
sure they're not depressed is the first
step because you can treat that and
actually you can treat that really well
with exercise so you might be able to
get a couple of bangs for your buck by
both treating your you know helping to
manage your depressive symptoms and
getting the brain other brain benefits
but you can also treat it
pharmaceutically or with therapy and
that can have a profound impact on the
way that you think and the way that you
manage um those symptoms so yeah I think
losing a partner you're also losing a
social connection and we know that
social connections are so important and
so that loneliness and that loss of a
social connection is important so um I
think that's that's all wrapped up in
these brain changes and these are all
modifiable things we can watch out for
our parents or people in our community
when these are H things are happening
and try to help them maintain better
social
connections we have a closing tradition
on this podcast where the last guest
leaves a question for the next guest
unaware of who they'll be leaving it for
and the question left for you
interesting maybe a little bit obvious
but how can your work help the world
it's a simple answer I guess but I think
it's profound that if you if you sit
less and you move more you will not only
help yourself but you will also help the
general population right I mean we when
when we talk about um uh aging it
doesn't just affect you right it affects
everybody around you it affects your
family caregivers it affects our economy
I mean the US is is is is we're thinking
the US might end up spending a trillion
dollars a year on Alzheimer's Disease by
2050 right and so prevention will have a
big impact on our economy and I'm not
saying people should Implement sitting
less and moving more for our economy but
by doing that you might actually on a
broad scale have a big impact on on our
world and so you know I hope that that
message gets out there that's why I'm so
I was excited to you know to do this
podcast with you because you know I
think it is a message that we need to
keep repeating and and and find ways to
help people do that because I think it
can have a profound effect on themselves
their family and Society are you hopeful
well that's a hard question to answer I
mean I I am on some level because I
think you know especially with the focus
on you know start moving away from
having people do big steps and trying to
get people to do small steps first I am
hopeful that we can motivate people to
to implement these these changes I I
hope it possible um it's been hard to do
is the the data going in the wrong
direction at the moment generally you
know what we just haven't seen big
improvements in in adherence and I think
one of the things I'm worried about is
that
worldwide uh more countries are becoming
more like the US and UK and instead of
less right and our societies are aging
and so you know we have a larger number
of older people and so just by the sheer
numbers we're going to have more people
with these these diseases and so you
know implementing these these um
increases in activity reductions and
sedentary Behavior hopefully will have
these kind of profound effects on our
aging Society but I think it needs to be
our Focus like right now you know when
we think about Alzheimer's disease we
don't have drugs that that are going to
have a big impact I mean there's some
new drugs that that are promising maybe
um but the biggest thing we can do is
prevention and that's where this work
comes in is you know if we can prevent
or delay we can save people happiness I
mean improve their happiness and we can
save money and we can improve Society
David thank you thank you absolutely
incredibly enlightening and inspiring
and maybe most importantly of all
motivating conversation motivating
because knowledge is power um and you've
given me so much knowledge which has
added fuel to a bunch of different
behaviors that are critical for my
cognitive outcomes but also just My
overall all day-to-day health so thank
you so much for that thank you so much
for doing the work that you do because I
know you're probably doing it in part
because you're incredibly curious and
you love it um but the other part of
that is it's an incredible service to
all of us that you go out there and you
take this time to do all this research
that you then pass out to society in a
way that's going to serve us and get us
close to the goals that matter most keep
us healthy and happy into our later
years and keep families together
ultimately so thank you for the work you
do and thank you for being here today
you're welcome thanks so much for having
me on it's
pleasure quick one as you might know a
company that I've invested in is now
also a sponsor of this podcast and
they're called Zoe and I'm coming to you
today with a warning it is January and
it's all of those diet companies
favorite month of the year and that
means that you're about to hear a lot of
jargon and words across all types of
media when it comes to diet culture
please don't get caught up in the fads
when it comes to your own health you
must listen to experts and that's
exactly what Zoe has Zoe isn't about
restriction or removing foods from your
diet it's about building sustainable
daily habits that will make your life
better forever they'll help you to
discover how eating in the right way for
your body with what they call
personalized nutrition will have you
feeling the benefits almost instantly
and far into the future if you're
looking to pick up new habits this year
then use my code
ce10 to get 10% off of your Zoe kit and
do it right now
do you need a podcast to listen to next
we've discovered that people who liked
this episode also tend to absolutely
love another recent episode we've done
so I've linked that episode in the
description below I know you'll enjoy
[Music]
it